.. _what:

What is it?
===========

.. note::
   These docs assume readers have a basic knowledge of Python and are familiar with the Python 
   package, xarray. If you're not familiar with xarray, check out the excellent `xarray tutorial 
   webpage <https://tutorial.xarray.dev/intro.html>`_.

The short, high-level description
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ACCESS-NRI catalog is essentially a table of climate data products that exist on Gadi. Each 
entry in the table corresponds to a different product, and the columns contain attributes associated 
with each product--things like the models, frequencies and variables available. Users can search on 
the attributes to find the products that might be useful to them. For example, a user might want to 
know which data products contain variables X, Y and Z at monthly frequency. The ACCESS-NRI catalog 
enables users to find products that satisfy their query and to subsequently load their data without 
having to know the location and structure of the underlying files.

.. topic:: Hang on, I don't have access to Gadi!

   Never fear, you may still have a use for :code:`access-nri-intake-catalog`! You can use the :ref:`builders` in 
   the package to create Intake-ESM datastores for your own experiments. See the `Quickstart tutorial`_ 
   on building your own Intake-ESM datastores for details.

   .. _Quickstart tutorial: ../datastores/quickstart.html


.. _what_detailed:

The more detailed description
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ACCESS-NRI catalog provides a catalog of *Intake sources* and associated metadata.

.. topic:: Wait, what are "Intake sources"?

   "Intake" is a Python package that provides a general interface for loading data in Python. 
   Intake provides a set of data loaders (called "drivers") that allow users to load a wide range of 
   data formats into familiar Python data structures (e.g. a pandas dataframe or xarray Dataset) 
   using the exact same code. Some drivers are built into Intake, and some are provided by other 
   "plugin" packages. Documentation of the Intake package can be found 
   `here <https://intake.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html>`_ and a list of available Intake drivers 
   can be found `here <https://intake.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugin-directory.html>`_.

   "Intake sources" describe data that can be loaded using an Intake driver. For example, an Intake 
   source might describe a simple csv file to be opened using the inbuilt Intake "csv" driver, or it 
   might describe a set of netcdf files to be opened using the plugin 
   `Intake-ESM <https://intake-esm.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`_ "esm_datastore" driver. In fact, the 
   ACCESS-NRI catalog itself is a type of Intake source that uses the plugin 
   `Intake-dataframe-catalog <https://intake-dataframe-catalog.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest>`_ 
   "df_catalog" driver.

The entries in the ACCESS-NRI catalog are *Intake-ESM datastores* for climate data products that exist 
on Gadi.

.. topic:: Wait, what are "Intake-ESM datastores"?

   Intake-ESM datastores are a type of Intake source that describes a climate data product comprising 
   many files (e.g. netcdf files). Users can search across metadata associated with each file (e.g. 
   a variable name) and open contiguous files into xarray Datasets for subsequent analysis. For 
   example, NCI provides Intake-ESM datastores for the CMIP5 and CMIP6 data collections available on 
   Gadi. In `their documentation <https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=213713098>`_ 
   they demonstrate how to execute a search across these datastores to find and open a few datasets.

   Intake-ESM datastores are often also referred to as Intake-ESM "catalogs". In this sense, the 
   ACCESS-NRI catalog can be though of as providing a catalog of catalogs. To try and avoid confusion 
   in these docs, we will use the term "datastore" instead of "catalog" when referring to Intake-ESM.
   
   .. note::
      The CMIP5 and CMIP6 Intake-ESM datastores generated by NCI are available as entries in the 
      ACCESS-NRI catalog.

A set of core metadata attributes are associated with each entry in the ACCESS-NRI catalog. At the 
moment these include:

* The name of the data product
* A short description of the data product
* The model(s) used
* The realm(s) available
* The frequency(/ies) available 
* The variable(s) available

A simple search API allows users to filter the entries in the catalog based on these metadata 
attributes. The idea is that users will:

#. search the ACCESS-NRI catalog for data products, e.g. products containing the models, variables etc 
   that are of interest to them.
#. open the Intake-ESM datastore(s) for the product(s) of interest. 
#. search the Intake-ESM datastore(s) for the datasets within each product that are of interest to them.
   A "dataset" here is a set of files that can be readily opened and combined for analysis.
#. open the datasets of interest as xarray Dataset(s).
#. perform some analysis on the xarray Dataset(s).
